Documentation with latest guidance, and adjust types accordingly (#69)
apple/swift-distributed-tracing: Sources/Tracing/Docs.docc/Guides/InstrumentYourLibrary.md

# Instrument Your Library or Framework

## Overview 

This guide is aimed at library and framework developers who wish to instrument their code using distributed tracing.

Doing so within a library may enable automatic trace propagation and is key to propagating trace information across
distributed nodes, e.g. by instrumenting the HTTP client used by such system.

> Other examples of libraries which benefit _the most_ from being instrumented using distributed tracing include:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Other examples of libraries which would benefit _the most_ from being instrumented using distributed tracing include:
```

- HTTP Clients (e.g. AsyncHTTPClient),
- HTTP Servers (e.g. Vapor or Smoke),
- RPC systems (Swift gRPC or Swift's `DistributedActorSystem` implementations),
- database drivers (e.g. SQL or MongoDB clients),
- any other library which can emit meaningful span information about tasks it is performing.

The most important libraries to instrument are "edge" libraries, which serve to connect between systems, because
it is them who must inject and extract contextual baggage metadata to enable distributed trace ``Span`` propagation.

Following those, any database or other complex library which may be able to emit useful information about its internals are
also good candidates to being instrumented. Note that libraries may do so optionally, or hide the "verboseness" of such traces

> behind options, or only attach information if a Span is already active etc. Please review your library's documentation to learn

Reviewer: ```suggestion
behind options, or only attach information if a ``Span`` is already active etc. Please review your library's documentation to learn
```

more about it has integrated tracing support.

### Propagating baggage metadata

> When crossing boundaries between processes, such as making or receiving an HTTP request, the library responsible for doing so, should invoke instrumentation in order to inject or extract the contextual baggage metadata into/from the "carrier" type (such as the `HTTPResponse`) type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When crossing boundaries between processes, such as making or receiving an HTTP request, the library responsible for doing so should invoke instrumentation in order to inject or extract the contextual baggage metadata into/from the "carrier" type (such as the `HTTPResponse`) type.
```

#### Handling outbound requests

> When a library makes an "outgoing" request or message interaction, it should invoke the  method of a configured instrument. This will invoke whichever instrument the end-user has configured and allow them to customize what metadata gets to be propagated. This can be by the following diagram:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a library makes an "outgoing" request or message interaction, it should invoke the method of a configured instrument. This will invoke whichever instrument the end-user has configured and allow them to customize what metadata gets to be propagated. This can be depicted by the following diagram:
```

                  └────────────────────────────────────────────┘      └────┘
```

> Note: A library _itself_ cannot really know what information to propagate, since that depends on the used tracing or instrumentation system. The library does however understand its carrier type, and thus can implement the ``Injector`` protocol.

For example, an HTTP client e.g. should inject the current baggage (which could be carrying trace ``Span`` information) into the HTTP headers as follows:

```swift
func get(url: String) -> HTTPResponse {
  var request = HTTPRequest(url: url)
  
  if let baggage = Baggage.current {
    InstrumentationSystem.instrument.inject(
      baggage,
      into: &request,
      using: HTTPRequestInjector()
    )
  }
  
  try await _send(request)
}
```

As you can see, the library does not know anything about what tracing system or instrumentation is installed, because it cannot know that ahead of time. 

All it has to do is query for the current [task-local](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swift/tasklocal) `Baggage` value, and if one is present, call on the instrumentation system to inject it into the request.

> Since neither, the tracing API, or the specific tracer backend are aware of this library's specific `HTTPRequest` type, we also need to implement an ``Injector`` which takes on the responsibility of adding the metadata into the carrier type (which in our case is the `HTTPRequest`). An injector could for example be implemented like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since neither the tracing API nor the specific tracer backend is aware of this library's specific `HTTPRequest` type, we also need to implement an ``Injector`` which takes on the responsibility of adding the metadata into the carrier type (which in our case is the `HTTPRequest`). An injector could for example be implemented like this:
```

```swift
struct HTTPRequestInjector: Injector {
    func inject(_ value: String, forKey key: String, into request: inout HTTPRequest) {
        request.headers.append((key, value))
    }
}
```

> Once the metadat has been injected, the request–including all the additional metadata–is sent over the network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the metadata has been injected, the request–including all the additional metadata is sent over the network.
```

> Note: The actual logic of deciding what baggage values to inject depend on the tracer implementation, and thus we are not covering it in this _end-user_ focused guide. Refer to <doc:ImplementATracer> if you'd like to learn about implementing a ``TracerProtocol``.

#### Handling inbound requests

> On the receiving side, an HTTP server needs to perform the inverse operation, as it receives the request from the network and forms an `HTTPRequest` object, and before it passed it to user-code, it must extract any trace metadata from the request headers into the `Baggage`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the receiving side, an HTTP server needs to perform the inverse operation, as it receives the request from the network and forms an `HTTPRequest` object, and before it passes it to user-code, it must extract any trace metadata from the request headers into the `Baggage`:
```

```
                   ┌──────────────────────────────────┐
                   │   Specific Tracer / Instrument   │
                   └──────────────────────────────────┘
                                      ▲
                                      │
      instrument.extract(request, into: &baggage, using: httpExtractor)       
                                      │                                  
                               ┌──────▼──────┐                           
┌────┐          ┌──────────────┤ Tracing API ├────────────┐              
│ N  │          │HTTPServerLib └──────▲──────┘            │              
│ e  │          │                     │                   │              
│ t  │          │┌───────────────┐  ┌─▼───────────────┐   │              
│ w  │          ││     parse     │  │extract metadata │   │     ┌───────────┐
│ o  │─────────▶││  HTTPRequest  ├──▶from HTTPRequest │───┼────▶│ User code │
│ r  │          │└───────────────┘  └─────────────────┘   │     └───────────┘
│ k  │          │                                         │              
│    │          └─────────────────────────────────────────┘              
└────
```

> This is very similar to what we were doing on the outbound side, but the roles of baggage and request are somewhat inversed: we're extracting values from the carrier into the baggage. The code performing this task could look something like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is very similar to what we were doing on the outbound side, but the roles of baggage and request are somewhat reversed: we're extracting values from the carrier into the baggage. The code performing this task could look something like this:
```

```swift
func handler(request: HTTPRequest) async {
  // we are beginning a new "top level" context - the beginning of a request - 
  // and thus start from a fresh, empty, top-level baggage:
  var baggage = Baggage.topLevel

  // populate the baggage by extracting interesting metadata from the incoming request:
  InstrumentationSystem.instrument.extract(
    request,
    into: &baggage,
    using: HTTPRequestExtractor()
  )

  // ... invoke user code ...
}
```

> Similarily to the outbound side, we need to implement an ``Extractor`` because the tracing libraries don't know about our specific HTTP types, yet we need to have them decide for which values to extract keys.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly to the outbound side, we need to implement an ``Extractor`` because the tracing libraries don't know about our specific HTTP types, yet we need to have them decide for which values to extract keys.
```

Author: Or even Silmarillion-y 😂 Man, this word is my arch-enemy... thanks for spotting it

```swift
struct HTTPRequestExtract: Instrumentation.Extractor {
    func extract(key: String, from request: HTTPRequest) -> String? {
        request.headers.first(where: { $0.0 == key })?.1
    }
}
```

Which exact keys will be asked for depends on the tracer implementation, thus we don't present this part of the implementation in part of the guide. For example, a tracer most likely would look for, and extract, values for keys such as `trace-id` and `span-id`. Note though that the exact semantics and keys used by various tracers differ, which is why we have to leave the decision of what to extract up to tracer implementations.

Next, your library should "*restore*" the contextual baggage, this is performed by setting the baggage task-local value around calling into user code, like this:

```swift
func handler(request: HTTPRequest) async { 
  // ... 
  InstrumentationSystem.instrument.extract(..., into: &baggage, ...)
  // ... 

  await Baggage.withValue(baggage) {
    await userCode(request)
  }
}
```

> This sets the task-local value `Baggage.current` which is used by [swift-log](https://github.com/apple/swift-log), as well as ``TracerProtocol`` APIs in order to later "*pick up*" the baggage and and e.g. include it in log statements, or start new trace spans using the information stored in the baggage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This sets the task-local value `Baggage.current` which is used by [swift-log](https://github.com/apple/swift-log), as well as ``TracerProtocol`` APIs in order to later "*pick up*" the baggage and e.g. include it in log statements, or start new trace spans using the information stored in the baggage.
```

```swift
/// Example library protocol, offering multiple callbacks, all semantically part of the same request handling.
protocol SampleHTTPHandler {
  // called immediately when an incoming HTTPRequests headers are available, 
  // even before the request body has been processed.
  func requestHeaders(headers: HTTPHeaders) async
  
  // Called multiple (or zero) times, for each "part" of the incoming HTTPRequest body.
  func requestBodyPart(ByteBuffer) async
}
```

You may want to restore the baggage once around both those calls, or if that is not possible, restore it every time when calling back into user code, e.g. like this:

```swift
actor MySampleServer { 
  
  var baggage: Baggage = .topLevel
  var userCode: SampleHTTPHandler

  func onHeaders(headers: HTTPHeaders) async {
    await Baggage.withValue(self.baggage) { 
      await userHandler.requestHeaders(headers)
    }
  }
  
  func onBodyPart(part: ByteBuffer) async { 
    await Baggage.withValue(self.baggage) { 
      await userHandler.requestHeaders(headers)
    }
  }
}
```

> While this code is very simple for illustration purposes, and it may seem suprising why there are those two separate places where we need to call into user-code separately. But in practice such situations can happen when using asynchronous network or database libraries which offer their API in terms of such callbacks. Always consider if and when to restore baggage such that it makes sense for the end user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While this code is very simple for illustration purposes, and it may seem surprising why there are two separate places where we need to call into user-code separately, in practice such situations can happen when using asynchronous network or database libraries which offer their API in terms of callbacks. Always consider if and when to restore baggage such that it makes sense for the end user.
```

### Starting Trace Spans in Your Library

The above steps are enough if you wanted to provide contextual baggage propagation, and already enables techniques such as *correlation ids* which can be set once, in one system, and then carried through to any downstream services the code makes calls from while the baggage is set.

> Many libraries also have the opportunity to start trace spans themselfes, on behalf of users, in pieces of the library that can provide useful insight in the behavior or the library in production. For example, the HTTPServer can start spans as soon as it begins handling HTTP requests, and this way provide a parent span to any spans the user-code would be creating itself. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many libraries also have the opportunity to start trace spans themselves, on behalf of users, in pieces of the library that can provide useful insight in the behavior or the library in production. For example, the HTTPServer can start spans as soon as it begins handling HTTP requests, and this way provide a parent span to any spans the user-code would be creating itself. 
```

> Let us revisit the previous sample HTTPServer which restored baggage around invoking the user-code, and further extend it to start a span including basic information about the HTTPRequest being handled:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let us revisit the previous sample HTTPServer which restores baggage around invoking the user-code, and further extend it to start a span including basic information about the HTTPRequest being handled:
```

#### Manual Span Lifetime Management

While the ``TracerProtocol/withSpan(_:ofKind:_:)-11n3y`` API is preferable in most situations, it may not be possible to use when the lifetime of a span only terminates in yet another callback API. In such situations, it may be impossible to "wrap" the entire piece of code that would logically represent "the span" using a `withSpan(...) { ... }` call.

In such situations you can resort to using the ``TracerProtocol/startSpan(_:baggage:ofKind:)`` and ``Span/end()`` APIs explicitly. Those APIs can then be used like this:

```swift
// Callback heavy APIs may need to store and manage spans manually:
var span: Span? 

func startHandline(request: HTTPRequest) {
  self.span = InstrumentationSystem.tracer.startSpan("\(request.path)")
  
  userCode.handle(request)
}

func finishHandling(request: HTTPRequest, response: HTTPResponse) {
  // always end spans (!)
  span?.end() // ends and flushes the span
}
```

> It is very important to _always_ end spans that are started, as otherwise resources they use may keep accumulating and lead to memory leaks, or worse issues in tracing backends dependin on their implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is very important to _always_ end spans that have been started, as otherwise resources they use may keep accumulating and lead to memory leaks, or worse issues in tracing backends depending on their implementation.
```
